---
Id: 1007
Title: Introduction to JavaScript
Author: Andrew Caskey
Tags: Javascript Introduction
Topic: Javascript
Abstract: Learning some of the fundamental concepts of Javascript and questions asked in javascript interview.
HeaderImage: /BL-1007/javascript.jpeg
isPublished: true
---


## Introduction to JavaScript {#Introduction-to-JavaScript}

JavaScript is a popular programming language that is used to create interactive and dynamic web pages. It was first created in 1995 by Brendan Eich, and has since become one of the most widely used programming languages on the web.

## What is JavaScript {#What-is-JavaScript}

JavaScript is a client-side scripting language, meaning that it is executed in the user's web browser. It is used to add interactivity to web pages, such as validating forms, creating animations, and updating content without requiring a page refresh.

JavaScript is a high-level, dynamic, and interpreted language, which means that it is easy to read and write, can be executed without compilation, and is capable of handling a variety of data types.

## Getting Started with JavaScript {#Getting-Started-with-JavaScript}
Here's an example of a simple JavaScript program:

```javascript
// Define a variable and assign it a value
let message = "Hello, world!";

// Display the value of the variable in the console
console.log(message);

```

## Basic JavaScript Concepts {#Basic-JavaScript-Concepts

Here are some basic concepts that you should learn when getting started with JavaScript:

**Variables**: Learn how to declare and assign values to variables. Variables are used to store data.

**Data types**: JavaScript has several built-in data types, including strings, numbers, booleans, and objects. Learn how to use each data type and how to convert between them.

**Operators**: Learn about arithmetic, comparison, and logical operators. These are used to perform calculations and make decisions in your code.

**Control structures**: Learn how to use conditional statements (if/else) and loops (for/while) to control the flow of your code.

**Functions**: Learn how to define and call functions. Functions are reusable blocks of code that can perform specific tasks.

## Examples {#Examples}

### Variables
```javascript
let name = "John";
let age = 30;
let isMarried = true;
```
In this example, we've created three variables: name, age, and isMarried. name is a string, age is a number, and isMarried is a boolean.


### Array
Arrays are used to store multiple values in JavaScript. Here's an example:

```javascript
let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

console.log(numbers[2]); // Output: 3
```

### Control Structures
Control structures are used to control the flow of your code in JavaScript. Here are some examples:


#### If/Else Statements 
```javascript
let age = 25;

if (age < 18) {
  console.log("You are not old enough to vote.");
} else {
  console.log("You are old enough to vote.");
}
```
In this example, the if statement checks if the age variable is less than 18. If it is, it displays a message saying the user is not old enough to vote. If not, it displays a message saying the user is old enough to vote.



#### For Loops
```javascript
for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}

```
In this example, the for loop counts from 0 to 9 and logs each number to the console.


#### While Loops
```javascript
let i = 0;

while (i < 10) {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
}
```
In this example, the while loop counts from 0 to 9 and logs each number to the console.


### Functions
Functions are reusable blocks of code that perform a specific task. Here's an example:

```javascript
function addNumbers(num1, num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}

let result = addNumbers(5, 10);

console.log(result); // Output: 15
```
In this example, we've created a function called addNumbers that takes two parameters, num1 and num2, and returns their sum. We've then called the function with the values 5 and 10, and stored the result in a variable called result. Finally, we've printed the result to the console.



If you want to learn more about JavaScript, there are many great resources available online, including tutorials, videos, and courses. You can also check out the official JavaScript documentation for a comprehensive guide to the language.


## Conclusion {#Conclusion}
These are just some of the basic JavaScript concepts that every beginner should learn. 

If you want to learn more about JavaScript, there are many great resources available online, including tutorials, videos, and courses. You can also check out the official JavaScript documentation for a comprehensive guide to the language.

Check out some of these sources 

|[Javascript MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)|
|[Tutorial](https://javascript.info/)|
|[Wes Bos 30 Day Challenge](https://github.com/wesbos/JavaScript30)|
